CEP 34: Contents of conda packages (#133)
conda/ceps: cep-XXXX.md

# CEP XXXX - Contents of conda packages

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> CEP XXXX - Contents of conda packages </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Sep 27, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Sep 27, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/133 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> N/A </td></tr>
<tr><td> Requires </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/82, https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/113, https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/124, https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/132 </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP describes the contents of conda packages, regardless of how they are compressed and distributed.

## Motivation

The motivation of this CEP is mostly informative, but will also try to clarify some ambiguous details that should be homogenized across existing implementations.

## Specification

> An extracted conda package is a directory that MUST at least include an `info/index.json` file. Other important metadata files SHOULD be included under `info/`.

Reviewer: Later on the document notes that `./info/paths.json` and `./info/hash_input.json` are also required. So, those should probably be mentioned here as well as part of this "MUST at least include"

```suggestion
An extracted conda package is a directory that MUST at least include `info/index.json`, `./info/paths.json` and `./info/hash_input.json` files. Other important metadata files SHOULD be included under `info/`.
```

Additionally, the package directory MAY contain any number of files in any subdirectories.
Some locations MAY receive special handling by conda clients.

### `info/` directory

This special directory contains all the metadata necessary to provide a functional conda package.

Build tools MUST NOT package arbitrary files in this directory.

#### `./info/index.json`

Required.

This file contains essential metadata about the package, such as its name, version or dependencies. The contents of this file MAY be used to populate the `repodata.json` files.

This file MUST conform to the following schema:

> - `name: str`. Lowercased name of the package. It MUST comply with [CEP 26](./cep-0026.md).

Reviewer: > I've used "required unless stated otherwise" throughout the CEP, but maybe I can call that explicitly.

Ah, ok that makes sense! Sounds good to me

> What part do you want to split in its own CEP? index.json? The info/ folder?

I mean for the `index.json`. Like if other bits of the ecosystem are using this file it would be nice to be able to reference the specification of just the `index.json` without the added context of the conda package spec.  For example, the case where this file may populate `repodata.json`.

- `track_features: str`. Space-separated string of unique identifiers.
- `python_site_packages_path: str`. Site-packages path, as introduced in [CEP 20](./cep-0020.md).

Additional keys MAY be present. The following ones are well-known but deprecated:

- `arch: str`. The architecture the package is built for, as returned by Python's `platform.machine()`, or empty in the case of `subdir == 'noarch'`.
- `platform: str`. The OS the package is built for. This is the first component of `subdir`, or empty in the case of `noarch`.
- `features: str`. Space-separated string of identifiers of properties unique to this build.
- `app: dict[str, Any]`. Metadata for Anaconda Navigator.
- `preferred_env: str`.
- `provides_features: dict[str, str]`.
- `requires_features: dict[str, str]`.

#### `./info/paths.json`

Required.

This file MUST list the contents of the package as a list of _path entries_, as described below. It MUST not list the contents of the `info/` folder.

Each _path entry_ MUST be a dictionary that complies to the following schema:

- `_path: str`. The path of the file, relative to the root of the package. It MUST use `/` as a path separator, even on Windows.

> - `path_type: Literal['hardlink', 'softlink', 'directory']`. Optional, defaults to `hardlink`. Type of path entry.

Reviewer: Similar to above in `./info/index.json`, it would be good to standardize on a form to denote if a field is required or optional.

- `file_mode: Literal['binary', 'text']`. Optional, defaults to `text`. How to handle the file for prefix replacement.
- `prefix_placeholder: str`. Optional, defaults to an empty string. This is the placeholder string that MAY be replaced at install time with the target location. It MUST use `/` as a path separator, even on Windows.
- `no_link: bool`. Optional, defaults to `false`. Whether to link the file from the cache or force a copy.
- `sha256: str`. The hexadecimal string of SHA256 hash of the file contents. It MUST be a 64 character string containing only characters in the `[a-z0-9]` range. If the path is a softlink, the contents of the target file are hashed.
- `size_in_bytes: int`. The size of the file, in bytes. If the path is a softlink, the size of the target file is reported.

> `paths.json` supersedes `info/files`, `info/has_prefix`, and `info/no_link`. If both are present, `paths.json` takes precedence.

Reviewer: For consistency, probably good to always refer to this file in the same way

```suggestion
`./info/paths.json` supersedes `info/files`, `info/has_prefix`, and `info/no_link`. If both are present, `paths.json` takes precedence.
```

- `license_family: str`. Use `license` instead.
- `tags: list[str]`.
- `identifiers: list[str]`.
- `keywords: list[str]`.

Additional keys MAY be allowed. Some examples include vendor information such as the conda-build and conda versions used at build time, along with the packages present in the conda `base` environment (`conda_build_version`, `conda_version`, `root_pkgs`, respectively).

#### `./info/link.json`

Optional.

A dictionary containing important metadata for installation (linking) operations. Its contents MUST conform to the following schema:

- `package_metadata_version: int`. Version of this file. The only known value is `1`.
- `noarch: dict[str, Any]`. A dictionary describing the `noarch` configuration of the package. Its keys MUST conform to:
  - `type: Literal["generic", "python"]`. Type of `noarch` package.
  - `entry_points: list[str]`. If `type == "python"`, this key MUST list the console entry points of the Python package, as a list of strings with syntax `{executable-name}={dotted-import-path}:{function-name}` (for example `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`).

> - `preferred_env: dict[str, str]`. Deprecated, optional. It MUST have two keys: `name: str` (name of the preferred environment) and `executable_paths: list[str]` (list of preferred executable paths in that environment).

Reviewer: For consistency with other sections, lets keep the list of deprecated keys seperate 

```suggestion
These keys are commonly found, but are now considered deprecated:

- `preferred_env: dict[str, str]`. It MUST have two keys: `name: str` (name of the preferred environment) and `executable_paths: list[str]` (list of preferred executable paths in that environment).
```

#### `./info/licenses/`

Optional.

Directory containing all the license files that apply to the distributed code and resources.

It MAY be empty or absent if the recipe doesn't ship any installable files.

#### `./info/recipe/`

Optional.

Directory containing the recipe used to build the package. It SHOULD contain the original and rendered versions of the recipe file, along with the files necessary to run the build again.

It SHOULD contain a file specifying the licensing details of the recipe itself.

#### `./info/test/`

Optional.

Directory containing the scripts and files needed to test the package.

#### `./info/git`

Optional.

> If the package sources come from a `git` repository and the `git` executable is available, this file will include information about the status of the cloned repository. Namely, the output of:

Reviewer: Is there a stict requirement for the format of this file? Is it valid if the file exists but is empty?

#### `./info/files`

Deprecated.

Lists all files that are part of the package itself, one per line. All of these files need to get linked into the environment. Any files in the package that are not listed in this file are not linked when the package is installed. The directory delimiter for the files in `info/files` MUST always be `/`, even on Windows. This matches the directory delimiter used in the tarball.

#### `./info/has_prefix`

Deprecated.

Lists all files that contain a hard-coded build prefix or placeholder prefix, which needs to be replaced by the install prefix at installation time.

Each line of this file should be either a path, in which case it is considered a text file with the default placeholder `/opt/anaconda1anaconda2anaconda3`, or a space-separated list of `placeholder`, `mode`, and `path`, where:

- Placeholder is the path of the build prefix which needs to be replaced at install time.
- Mode is either `text` or `binary`.
- Path is the relative path of the file to be updated.

#### `./info/no_link`

Deprecated. Optional.

Lists all files that cannot be linked into environments and MUST be copied instead.

### Recommendations for installed files

> On Unix filesystems, packages generally follow a subset of the [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard):

Reviewer 2: Rooted at `/usr` with `/var` moved inside.

- `./bin/`: executables and scripts.
- `./etc/`: configuration files.
- `./include/`: header files.

> - `./lib/`: dynamic and static libraries.

Author: Added in fed59c653a011b04bded7d1669442e3cc6be4409

- `./share/`: miscellaneous data contents.

> On Linux, some sysroot packages may also populate a top-level directory named as a [target triplet](https://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/manual/autoconf-2.65/html_node/Specifying-Target-Triplets.html) with a single subdirectory `sysroot/` populated with a FHS-like tree.

Author: I think it's too low-level to include here.

- `./Library/`, uses the same directories as the Unix structure listed above. Most packages will populate this directory.
- MSYS2 or MinGW-w64 packages usually present FHS-structured contents under `./Library/usr/` or `./Library/mingw-w64/`, respectively. Additional variants like `./Library/ucrt64/`, `./Library/clang64/`, `./Library/mingw64/`, `./Library/clangarm64/` MAY also be found.
- Python interpreters and Python-related packages stay in the root-level:
  - `./DLLs/`: Compiled Python extensions (`.pyd`)
  - `./include/`: Python development headers (`.h`).
  - `./Lib/`: Equivalent to `./lib/pythonX.Y/site-packages` on Unix.
  - `./libs/`: Python `.lib` files.
  - `./Scripts/`: Python entry points (`.exe` trampolines and the corresponding `-script.py` files).
  - `./Tools/`: Miscellaneous Python scripts.
  - `./python*.(exe|dll|pdb)`: The Python interpreter executables and libraries.
- Other interpreted languages might also populate the root-level directly, specially if they rely on `noarch: generic` packages. Some examples:

>   - Node.js places its executables in the root level, and leaves everything else under `./node_modules/`.

Author: [7374e38](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/133/commits/7374e382d6895194ab6dbad7a4ba21e23c74a69f)
